[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations,"
and we are broadcasting from
the Sounds True Wake Up festival
in the beautiful Rockies
surrounding Estes Park.
So what is creativity?
Is it something
that you do when you
have extra time on
your hands, or is it
something that maybe
you learned to do
in preschool and kindergarten?
Or can it be used by
Fortune 500 companies
to solve problems that they have
when they get a failed business
move or an industry dive?
Well, according to
Michael Gelb, yes,
that's what creativity
is used for.
He's the world's
leading authority
on the application of genius
thinking and creativity.
He's the author of many books
on how to use creativity,
including "How to Think Like
Leonardo da Vinci," which
is a very creative title.
And his latest,
"Creativity On Demand,"
which is how to ignite and
sustain that fire of genius.
Welcome.
>>MICHAEL GELB:
Thank you so much.
>>LISA: I have to ask
you about the lightning
bolt on the shirt.
>>GELB: Yes.
>>LISA: What is that?
>>GELB: This is our official
"Creativity On Demand--
Ignite and Sustain the
Fire of Genius" logo.
It's on the cover the book.
>>LISA: It looks like a
superhero type of thing.
>>GELB: It is.
I'm the superhero of creativity.
>>LISA: OK.
I got that right.
OK.
I like it.
So it's just your--
it's your logo
on the front of your shirt.
On the back is the
actual book cover.
>>GELB: That's right.
And my wife actually
handcrafted these t-shirts.
She used a color printer, made
these, and ironed them on.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>GELB: So we could
launch the book here
at the Wake Up Festival.
>>LISA: Very clever.
Very creative, very creative.
So first of all,
I have to ask you
about your book about how to
think like Leonardo da Vinci.
You have a fascination
with him, don't you?
>>GELB: Well, Leonardo was
one of my childhood heroes,
along with Superman.
>>LISA: Really?
>>GELB: Yeah, sure.
Because kids love superpowers.
When you're a kid, you're little
and there's all these grownups,
and you have to
do-- you're supposed
to do what you're told,
although I rarely ever did.
>>LISA: Yeah, uh-huh.
>>GELB: And so you
dream about having
powers that will free
you from the constraints
of your limited
authority as a child.
So that's why I think
comic books are so popular.
Kids fantasize
about superheroes.
>>LISA: It's about being
independent thinkers, too,
about thinking--
>>GELB: Well, that's
the great thing.
As I got older-- when I was a
kid, I heard about Leonardo.
My grandmother was an
Italian painter, an artist.
And she met my grandfather
because he ran a dress business
in the Lower East
Side of New York.
And he was a very
savvy businessman.
And he said, you know, even
though I'm making dresses
for women working
at home, they still
want a little touch of
beauty even if they're
working in the
kitchen or ironing.
He said, so who are
the best designers?
>>LISA: Artists.
>>GELB: Italians.
>>LISA: Oh, Italians.
>>GELB: An Italian
artist, of course.
So my grandmother had just
come back from art school.
So my grandfather hired her.
And we joke in our
family that if they
had today's human
resource policies in terms
of sexual harassment back
then, we would not exist.
>>LISA: It's a good thing.
>>GELB: But fortunately--
>>LISA: It turned out fine.
>>GELB: Yes, it turned
out really great.
So we grew up with this
wonderful synthesis
of these cultures.
And my grandmother taught
me about Leonardo da Vinci.
And as I grew older, I
realized that Superman was only
a comic book character.
But Leonardo was real.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GELB: And he seemed,
to me, to embody
all of our human potential.
He, to me, is the
supreme archetype
of our creative gifts.
So I thought why not explore
in more detail what he wrote,
what he taught about accessing
our own creative power.
People ask me, did
you channel this?
>>LISA: Right.
>>GELB: I don't know why people
think something is necessarily
more potent because it
came from somebody dead.
>>LISA: Well, you went and
walked in his footsteps.
You had to have soaked
up some of that energy.
>>GELB: Oh, I did big time.
I did big time.
But what's in the book is
really practical advice
that Leonardo actually
gave to his students.
So if you read his notebooks,
he tells his students
how to be more creative.
>>LISA: And you did that.
You read his notebooks.
>>GELB: Well, I read them
all, over and over again.
>>LISA: And you took out these--
>>GELB: And I
abstracted the things
that could be translated
into contemporary terms
to be helpful to
all of us today--
to anybody who wants to live a
richer, more fulfilling life.
Or to my corporate clients, who
want a more creative culture.
They need to be more innovative.
They need to solve problems.
They need to be able
to access creativity
in a much more efficient,
effective and powerful way.
So this is my life quest.
I've used Leonardo-- or he's
used me, as the case may be.
>>LISA: Well, let's
talk about when
you went to-- you went
to where he lived,
where he was born
outside of Florence.
>>GELB: Absolutely, yes.
I went to the place
where he was born.
There's a little
town called Vinci--
>>LISA: OK.
>>GELB: It's just
west of Florence.
>>LISA: Leonardo of Vinci, OK.
>>GELB: He was actually born in
a tiny little place up the road
called Anchiano.
>>LISA:.
OK
>>GELB: And his mother and
his father were not married.
His father was in the Guild of
Accountancy and Notary Publics.
But since his mother
Caterina was not
married to his father
Piero, Leonardo
couldn't qualify for membership
in the accountant's guild.
So instead, his father sent him
to the studio of Verrocchio,
who was a famous painter
and artisan of the time,
and trained him in what
allowed him to eventually paint
the Last Supper
and the Mona Lisa,
those great world-changing
masterpieces.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GELB: But it's funny to
reflect that but for this quirk
of fate, Leonardo
would've been--
>>LISA: That's
some thunder there.
>>GELB: Yeah, that's exciting.
>>LISA: It's great.
>>GELB: That's Leonardo
telling me, "Yeah!"
>>LISA: Yes, I'm here.
>>GELB: He would have
been the greatest--
>>LISA: Hear me roar.
>>GELB: The greatest
accountant who ever lived.
So yes, I went to his
birthplace in Anchiano/Vinci.
And then I walked his
footsteps through Florence.
And then he moved to
Milan when he was 24.
So I went to Milan and
walked through the places
where we know that he painted
and studied and taught,
and worked for his
patron, the Duke of Milan.
>>LISA: Well, tell
me about that.
You walked in his
footsteps in the areas.
You looked at art or the
influences of his art
through his eyes.
>>GELB: Absolutely.
>>LISA: What did you absorb?
>>GELB: It's hard
to put into words,
because I felt like
I was accessing
a pure creative essence that
certainly transformed my life.
And based on the
response we've gotten to
"How to Think Like Leonardo
Da Vinci" since first came out
in 1998, it's transformed a
lot of other people's lives.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GELB: I just got this
great letter from-- I'm
not making this up.
>>LISA: Did you make
up anything else?
>>GELB: No.
I have to give this disclaimer,
because when you hear this,
it sounds-- it's just such
a delightful, funny story.
At least I think so.
I got this email just a few
weeks ago from this guy.
He said, I'm now a writer.
He said, and I was inspired
to become a writer by reading
your book, "How to
Think Like Leonardo."
He said, but I have
a confession to make.
He said, I originally stole
your book from the bookstore.
>>LISA: Oh, my god.
>>GELB: He said, and when I
read it, I was so inspired,
I went back and paid for it.
>>LISA: Oh my god.
Oh, man.
>>GELB: And it changed my life.
Isn't that the greatest?
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
He wanted to learn so much.
>>GELB: Right.
It just cracks me up.
>>LISA: Not usually
a thing you steal.
>>GELB: Well, it's
just so funny.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GELB: And then I got-- I was
on a call-in radio show years
ago, and a gentleman
called and he said, I just
want to tell you that your
book gave me everything
I always wanted to
teach my children
but didn't have
the words to say.
>>LISA: Oh, nice, nice.
>>GELB: So this is the meaning
and purpose of my life,
is use these
different metaphors,
use these different stories,
use these different ways
of reflecting back to
people their own potential
to think like Leonardo da Vinci.
>>LISA: So as he did
look at different things,
he saw them in a
different way, right?
>>GELB: That's what geniuses do.
They tend to see things
in different ways.
They don't take
things for granted.
They see more with
the eyes of a child.
They see with open,
innocent eyes.
They have the imagination
and the passion
for learning of a child.
They have the incredible
energy or chi of a child.
But then they have
the training and
the rational, analytical
ability of an adult.
So that's one of the great
characteristics of genius
is this childlike, playful
quality with this very
serious, passionate,
focused desire
to understand things
for themselves,
to think independently.
And after Milan, of course,
I went to-- I went to France.
Leonardo spent the last
three years of his life
in France under the patronage
of Francois the First,
the King of France.
And that's the most
extraordinary place
to be for a student
of the maestro
because there we know he lived
in the Clos du Luce, this
little mini-palace
next to Francois
the First's big palace.
And we know historically-- this
we know-- this was his bedroom.
This was his kitchen.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>GELB: This was his courtyard.
So one of my strongest life
memories of my whole lifetime
is standing in
Leonardo's bedroom,
looking out his window.
>>LISA: That he looked
out of every day.
>>GELB: That he looked
And then I just imagined
how did he see the world?
And I just, again, I opened
myself to the essences
to that imaginative leap.
And it's been a
tremendous inspiration
for me and for others.
>>LISA: What do
you think that he
saw when he looked
out the window?
Could you feel that?
>>GELB: I think two things.
I think he, just as an artist,
appreciated the beauty.
It's a very beautiful place.
And I think his heart-- it's
not just intellectual-- I think
his heart, his soul, every
cell of his being vibrated
with the exquisite
beauty all around him.
And I think that's
part of his ability
to make these exquisite
masterpieces was
his direct perception of the
essence of beauty and nature.
>>LISA: Perception
is a very good point.
Yes.
>>GELB: And at the
same time, I think
he saw structures and patterns
and mathematical formulae that
were intrinsic to this beauty.
That's the scientific
part of his mind.
And I'm better at the
pure artistic perception
than I am at the sacred geometry
and figuring all that all out.
But I'm pretty sure
he was doing both
at an extremely high level.
>>LISA: You could see
that-- I was just in Italy
and I was able to
see the Last Supper
and was watching
it come to life.
The story came to life from the
painting and of the betrayal,
and the virgin
mother next to him.
And it was so-- And each--
As you're talking now,
I'm remembering each one of
the faces of the disciples
had a story.
Each one of their faces had
the lines of the history.
It was really extraordinary.
>>GELB: Well, I want to give
you just a little background on
and why it's so extraordinary.
And some of it is actually
quite mystical and spiritual,
but not the way anybody
might normally think.
I could explain it if you like.
But the thing to understand
is Leonardo understood drama.
He understood human nature.
And he knew that if
he painted this scene
as no one had ever
painted it before--
>>LISA: Right.
>>GELB: He's the
first we know of
to paint the moment that
Christ says, "One of you
shall betray me."
Because that's the moment
of highest tension.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GELB: It's super drama.
>>LISA: Yes, yes, yes.
>>GELB: And what you see of
the disciples going, whoa,
did you hear what he said?
As Leonardo writes
in his notebook,
to paint the external
figure is easy.
To capture the soul is hard.
So he's trying to capture the
inter-- how would you feel?
Because this is part of what
the Renaissance is about.
It's not about saints
floating up to heaven.
It's about real people
and their experience
of the divine with
their feet on earth.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GELB: So here
are these disciples
acting just like
you and I would act
if we were at that dinner party.
And by the way, that's not
the Virgin Mary next to him.
It's Saint John.
Traditionally, always portrayed
in a-- It's one of the myths.
People say it's either-- People
think it's Mary Magdalene,
or that's all the
da Vinci code stuff.
>>LISA: Thank you.
>>GELB: It's just
not true, sorry.
>>LISA: It's not
the Virgin Mary.
>>GELB: No, it's Saint John,
traditionally portrayed
in a very feminized kind of
way to show the gentleness
and sweetness of Saint John.
It's a classic motif in art.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>GELB: But you want to know
the real spiritual meaning
of the painting, part of it, I
mean, just the beginning of it.
We could spend this
whole time just talking
about that painting.
But I'll just give you
one thing, one takeaway.
Go looka at-- There's a
reproduction of it in the book.
Or just go on your computer
and get the Last Supper,
and you'll have it right
there in front of you.
But this is a theme throughout
some of these larger Leonardo
paintings.
What you notice is Christ has
just made this announcement--
one of you shall betray me.
And everybody's freaking out.
>>LISA: Except him.
>>GELB: Except him.
Why do you think that is?
Because he knows
how the story ends.
>>LISA: Well, he had this
peaceful, peaceful look
on his face in his portrayal.
>>GELB: Beautifully so.
>>LISA: It was.
And he's also, he's aligned
around a vertical axis, which
is one of things we teach
people in Qigong practice,
for example.
Because you connect the
energy of heaven and earth
through your body.
And this is like an antenna.
So you don't get
as good reception
if you're schlomping around,
or if you hold it like that.
>>LISA: And in a
moment like that,
when you know you're going to
be betrayed, you would think--
>>GELB: You'd freak
out or go into this--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GELB: So he has this
unbelievable serenity.
So here's the simplest
lesson for us.
The simplest lesson
for us is stay aligned.
And I'll give you--
Here's the Qigong posture.
It's called the
universal posture.
Stay aligned with
your highest purpose
in the face of any challenge.
Go deep into your own center.
>>LISA: That is
exactly what you see
when you look at that painting.
>>GELB: Isn't it?
>>LISA: You could teach so
many things from just that.
But yes, it's about
staying to your true north.
Yes.
>>GELB: And just
so it's not just
my wild interpretation
of one Leonardo painting.
Look at the
Adoration of the Magi
in the Uffizi
gallery in Florence.
There's also a
reproduction in the book,
or just go on your computer.
Adoration of the Magi, Leonardo
da Vinci, Uffizi Gallery.
You'll see it.
It's another
unfinished painting.
But what you see in the
center is the Virgin Mary
holding the Christ child.
And she's surrounded by all
this chaos and all this tension
and all this attachment to
worldly things and change
and difficulty.
And there-- even though
it's an unfinished painting,
you can see-- and she's--
her figure looks more spiral,
because Leonardo was one of the
pioneers of the technical they
call contrapposto, where
they know it tends to be more
interesting to the eye if you
take that little pose like
this.
But what you'll see
is this pure line
through her and this
tremendous serenity again.
So it's the same message
in a different metaphor
and different biblical story.
>>LISA: So out of your
journey with Leonardo,
you extrapolated
seven principles
that you learned from him.
And they're also thread
through the book,
"Creativity On Demand."
>>GELB: Yes, they are.
>>LISA: We're going to talk
a little bit about these
and teach people some of-- the
first one is creativity, right?
>>GELB: Curiosita.
>>LISA: Curiosity.
>>GELB: Well, they
go hand in hand.
There is no creativity
without curiosity.
So in Italian, it's curiosita.
And it means to reawaken that
childlike curiosity, which
is your birthright.
As I said before, that's one
of the great characteristics
of genius, is that they
keep that childlike quality.
And one of the ways
I've now shared
that in another
fashion in the new book
is to access not just the
mental attitude, not just
the emotional
attitude of curiosita,
but the chi of curiosita.
>>LISA: The life force of it?
>>GELB: The life force energy.
Because it is-- what
if you could create
a personal renaissance
of the quality of energy
you had when you were six
or seven or eight years old?
>>LISA: It is actually
one of the ways
that I do interviews is
I am ferociously curious.
That's why I kept asking about--
I want to be there with you.
I want to walk in
those footsteps.
I am there.
I am insatiably curious.
Insatiably.
I could just keep going, but
we only have an hour, so.
>>GELB: I know
we're the same way.
We could just--
>>LISA: Tell me what
you saw, would you?
>>GELB: I'm watching you.
But this is what we're
talking about, too.
It's to have that
all-out passion,
that total creativity--
passion that drives creativity.
But part of what
makes creativity work
is, at the same time, that
setting of boundaries.
That, OK, here's our limitation.
Without limitation--
we've got an hour.
Without that limitation,
we could ramble on forever.
What could we say
that's most potent?
So I watched your brain
keeping control of yourself,
even as that, that--
>>LISA: This is
a perfect example
of creativity on demand.
Because we have this hour.
And most people have to
make split decisions.
They have to make
major decisions
in shorter, shorter,
shorter amount of time,
because of our
age of technology.
In boardrooms, you need to
come up with things in order
to have that competitive edge.
And so this is exactly
what we're talking about
is getting curious is the
first step to creativity.
>>GELB: First step.
And something that I talk more
about in "Creativity On Demand"
is-- and it may seem
even paradoxical.
Would you really do
this in a boardroom?
But I call it
"invoking the muse."
And it is, if you want
higher creativity,
if you want to be inspired by
da Vinci-like way of accessing
the universal field
of creative energy,
which has an intelligence
of its own, by the way--
>>LISA: Which is
what you did, yes.
>>GELB: If you want to tune
into that, what if you,
in your own way, in a way
that feels natural to you,
you asked for it before
any important challenge.
>>LISA: Great idea.
>>GELB: I did it
before this interview.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GELB: I do it before
every class I teach.
>>LISA: You tap
into the universal--
>>GELB: I ask.
You line around
the vertical axis.
There's all sorts
of-- What I've done
is taken all these
traditional Qigong practices
and made them accessible
so you can use them
for different creative purposes.
I tested them out and I
worked with great masters
like my dear friend
master Robert Peng.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GELB: On what
do you think would
help the average person
be more creative?
Tap into that energy
behind our pure curiosity,
and then we share
those in the new book.
>>LISA: So you can take
the creative energy
and you can use it like
a life force energy
when you move energy
through Qigong.
>>GELB: Big time.
>>LISA: And that's what you do.
>>GELB: That's what we're doing.
>>LISA: You physically
take it and you move.
>>GELB: Well, you
don't so much take it,
you allow yourself
to be taken by it.
>>LISA: Yes.
But when anyone has writer's
block or a challenge with music
and so forth, this is a great
exercise to be able to do.
>>GELB: I think it was
Steve Martin or something--
I follow him on Twitter
and he posted this tweet.
It was something like,
"Writer's block is just
a fancy excuse for whining."
>>LISA: Oh, yes, yes.
>>GELB: That's
only true-- I mean,
I don't need to sound
uncompassion towards people
are suffering from
a creative block.
I'm very compassionate.
And my goal is to help
heal them, believe me.
>>LISA: Yes, that's right.
>>GELB: But once
you know how-- what
the architecture of
the mind as it relates
to the creative process, once
you know, once you've embodied
these seven da Vinci principles,
once you learn even just
do one or two of the simplest
exercises in this book,
you will access that
energy more effectively.
And you will dramatically
increase the odds
that you will be
free from whatever
block you were
experiencing before.
>>LISA: OK.
So I want to get to
some of those exercises.
But let me get through
a few of the principles.
>>GELB: We can do them all.
>>LISA: OK.
All right, so curiosi--
>>GELB: Curiosita.
>>LISA: Curiosita.
>>GELB: Very good.
>>LISA: Another one.
>>GELB: Dimonstrazione.
It means "think for yourself."
Demonstrate things in
your own experience.
Sensazione.
Sharpen your senses.
Appreciate beauty.
Sfumato, which is the
word that art critics used
to refer to the hazy, mysterious
quality of Leonardo's painting.
And it refers to the most
significant or distinguishing
characteristic of highly
creative people, which
is their ability to
embrace the unknown.
Arte/scienza, balance
art and science.
Use your whole brain.
>>LISA:.
OK
>>GELB: Corporalita.
Integrate the body and the mind.
Leonardo was a great athlete.
He was renowned for his
grace and physical beauty.
He was a fencer, a horseman.
I even found out he
was a juggler, which
I was delighted to discover.
>>LISA: Wow, so are you.
>>GELB: I felt, yeah!
>>LISA: See Michael
juggle in a little bit.
>>GELB: Right?
Yes, the physical
energy-- people
forget that energy is a
huge part of creating.
And Leonardo had that
energy and gave advice
on how we can cultivate it.
And then the seventh principle
brings it all together,
Connessione, everything
connects to everything else.
So learn to look for
relationships, patterns,
and connections.
See the big picture.
Connect it with the details.
Be mindful and focused
on what you're doing,
and align with the
universal principles.
>>LISA: So diving into any
one of those principles
would help unlock any
type of creativity
block that someone has.
>>GELB: Yes.
>>LISA: Now you mentioned
a couple of other exercises
in the book.
You're really clear about this
process of sleeping on it.
So let's talk a
little bit about that.
>>GELB: Sure.
Here's the great thing is today,
Professor Roberts Stickgold
at Harvard University,
Dr. Sara Mednick.
These are some of the
leading researchers--
Mednick, I believe, was
a student of Stickgold.
They are showing what's
happening in the brain
when you sleep on it.
Everybody knows you're just more
likely to have a better idea
if you sleep on it.
>>LISA: Get some rest.
But why?
>>GELB: Well,
they're figuring out
what's happening with
your neurotransmitters,
how it helps
consolidate learning,
how it helps make new pathways
and connections in your brain.
It's why Mednick shows in
her book-- it's called,
"Take a Nap, Change Your Life."
And it shows how people who
take a nap for 20 minutes, 25
minutes, are way more
productive, including
one study, for example,
with NASA pilots.
So this is not some
wishy-washy group.
They're not going to tell them
just, oh, go ahead, take a nap.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GELB: Except they found that
when they took naps of 20,
30 minutes, whatever,
their productivity,
their effectiveness
went up significantly.
I forget the exact statistic,
but it was around 30%.
>>LISA: I've done it before.
I wake up so much more
invigorated, focused.
>>GELB: So Leonardo, in
his notebooks-- I told you,
I took what he said
to to his students.
He said, it is well
that you should
take a break from your
work and go off and take
a little relaxation.
And he was renowned
for taking these naps
himself throughout the day.
And then Thomas Edison,
whole different culture,
whole different
focus and purpose.
There's a picture-- My
delightful co-author,
Sarah Miller
Caldicott, who's Thomas
Edison's great-great-great
grandniece--
>>LISA: Oh, wow.
>>GELB: Sarah and I wrote
this book called, "Innovate
Like Edison."
And in the book,
we have a picture
that we got from the Edison
archives of Thomas Edison
taking a nap on his
desk in his office.
>>LISA: Oh, that's a good place.
>>GELB: And everybody
he worked with swore
that whenever he woke
up, he had more ideas
and was even more creative
than before the nap.
So these are simple things that
these great geniuses teach us.
Now we can validate them
with contemporary science.
>>LISA: Science, yeah.
>>GELB: And you'll be more
effective if you take breaks,
as Leonardo recommended, if you
take a nap once or twice a day.
>>LISA: Or if you sleep on it.
>>GELB: If you sleep on it.
And if you build things--
These things are so simple.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GELB: I share this
with my corporate clients
who are very-- they're
very nuts and bolts.
Their phrase is always, we
want to take-home value.
Give us something we
can do differently
where we really see the results.
And guess what?
They really see the results.
>>LISA: Well, I can't
imagine leaving a board room,
going and taking a nap,
and then coming back.
>>GELB: Well, that's
why I get them
to do-- when we're
in the boardroom,
I'll get them to do--
I'll get them just
to take a walk outside.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>GELB: I used to work with the
senior engineers from DuPont
many, many years ago.
And I literally got them
to get out of the building
at least once a day.
They started to do this
after lunch and take a walk.
I said, just let's walk around
the building a few times.
And they immediately
reported to me
that they were more
effective and more productive
and felt better and
had more energy.
>>LISA: More alive.
>>GELB: And then because
they're engineers,
I had to coach them to try
walking around the building
the other way sometimes.
>>LISA: Because it was
creatures of habit.
>>GELB: They were just like--
but they were great.
>>LISA: I know them well, yes.
And respect them as well.
My husband's a tech, and he
does-- but God bless him.
Because if it was
up to me to do that,
I would forget half
of it, get distracted.
He needs to be methodical
in what he does.
OK, so we've gone through those.
So you have taught before
where you go into corporations,
go through a whole day's
work, and ask people
to sleep on what they've learned
and come back the next day,
yeah?
>>GELB: Well, what
we-- what I aim to do--
You know, when I first started
teaching in the late '70s,
when I was the youngest
person in the room,
people were usually
twice my age.
I was doing five-day seminars.
Now people are
usually half my age,
and it's very hard
to get them away--
>>LISA: Five days.
>>GELB: For even two days.
But I lobby for it.
I even adjust my pricing so
that they get a tremendous value
on whatever part of
the second day they do.
Because if I can introduce
them to these ideas
and the techniques and
methods that go with them,
get them to sleep on it,
come back the next morning,
apply it to one of their most
important work challenges,
it'll just be that
much more effective.
They'll say-- They'll-- I
mean, they love the sem--
I do keynotes all the time.
I did an 18-minute program.
Somebody was trying to
do a Ted-style program
for their company.
I've done that.
I do a half day.
I do a day.
I serve my clients.
I do what they want and need.
But I serve them
better if they allow
me to get them to integrate
an overnight into the process
of new learning so that they can
make the new neurotransmitter
connections.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
>>GELB: And then it just--
the learning lasts longer
and it's a more of a change.
>>LISA: There's a lot
of evidence around that.
Let's talk about one of
the techniques, which
is the mind mapping technique.
And we have a picture here
of what it looks like.
So this is how you came up
with the seven principles,
is through mind mapping?
>>GELB: Well, mind
mapping is a method
that I learned from the
gentleman who originated it,
my dear friend Tony Buzan.
Way back in 1975, I was training
as a teacher of the Alexander
Technique, and Tony was taking
Alexander Technique lessons
from my teacher.
So he came to speak
at our school,
and he presented mind mapping
and speed reading and memory.
And I thought, wow,
this guy has got
a big, important piece
of the puzzle here.
So I went to the
director at the school.
I said, I gotta learn this.
And he said, well, it's
funny you say that,
because Tony said to me, who
was that American guy who's
asking all those questions?
We need to connect.
So we started collaborating.
I taught him how to juggle.
>>LISA: Great.
>>GELB: Eventually, I gave
him Alexander lessons.
I was his martial arts
sensei for a while.
And he taught me mind mapping,
speed reading, memory,
then invited me to be on
this corporate seminar--
a five-day seminar in
Vevey, Switzerland.
And fortunately, the head
of HR of that company said,
we want this American
guy on all our seminars.
So I'm travelling all over
the world teaching people,
senior executives.
I knew nothing about
business way back then.
But they liked what I
was sharing with them.
And meantime, right
at the same time,
I was working on
my master's thesis.
And I was stuck because I
learned, like most people,
to write by making an outline.
I was trying to think of
roman numeral number one,
and I was just looking at
this blank page going, uh-oh.
So when Tony taught
me mind mapping,
he said, forget about
the top-down structure.
He said, start in the
center, draw image
to inspire your imagination,
and then let your mind go free.
Just follow the discipline
of printing in keywords
so you could read what your
ideas are later more easily.
And then draw
illustrations and doodles.
And even though I
thought I couldn't draw--
>>LISA: It didn't matter.
>>GELB: It didn't matter.
So I did this, and my mind
absolutely exploded with ideas.
>>LISA: Opened up.
Now, in the center
of this picture,
you have a picture
of little man.
>>GELB: In my da Vinci mind map.
Yeah, that was many years later.
I'm telling you about my very
first breakthrough with mind
mapping, because that's
how I became an author.
Because I then-- once I put
out-- this was on the-- I
put flip chart paper on the
walls of my flat in London.
And I just filled it.
It was a mess.
It was chaotic, all over
the place, pure association.
But I said, oh my god, I
know much more about this
than I thought I did.
Then I stepped back
and I said, OK,
what are the most
important ideas here?
And it was absolutely obvious.
So I highlighted them in yellow
phosphorescent highlighter.
Then I asked, what
order should they go in?
And that was really clear.
I wrote it out longhand.
A friend of mine typed it up.
We sent it into
my thesis adviser.
And when I got my master's
degree, my thesis adviser said,
I've never seen a student's
writing improve so much
in the course of
my academic career.
He said to me,
it's as though you
found your true
voice, which I did.
And then I realized that part
of my purpose and mission
here is to help others
find their true voice
through methods like this.
>>LISA: And you went through
this journey yourself.
>>GELB: So that
became my first book.
That's how I became an author.
That became my first book,
"Body Learning, An Introduction
to the Alexander Technique."
It got translated
into 16 languages.
It's still in print
33 years later.
So then for each book,
I made a mind map.
And, of course, for-- So
what you see here and all
the others--
>>LISA: They all had mind maps.
>>GELB: They all
started with a mind map.
And then I do mind
maps of the chapters.
>>LISA: The one that you're
seeing here on the screen
is the mind map of
the da Vinci book?
>>GELB: When I give
a keynote about how
to think like
Leonardo da Vinci, I
want to give them a very--
I've just taught them the seven
principles, just
like we discussed.
So then I show them
this, and I say,
what's the image in the center?
And they say, oh, the parachute.
Why?
Because Leonardo invented it.
>>LISA: The parachute.
>>GELB: Yes, he
invented the parachute
before anyone could fly.
>>LISA: I did not know that.
>>GELB: Yeah.
And then the figure
underneath the parachute
is Leonardo's
Vitruvian Man, which
represents your unlimited
human potential.
It's a classic symbol
of the Renaissance.
Then you see we have a
branch-- branching out--
just an organic way, like brain
cells branch out, neurons--
>>LISA: Neurons, yes.
>>GELB: Branch through
dendrites and axons
to connect with other neurons.
So that's-- This is a
natural, organic structure.
So you see curiosita
with the question mark.
Keep a notebook.
Dimonstrazione, the
three views of a flower
that Leonardo-- he tells
us look at everything
from three perspectives.
>>LISA: Oh, wonderful.
>>GELB: Sensazione.
You see the eye.
Sharpen the senses.
Sfumato.
You see the yin and yang symbol.
>>LISA: Oh, nice.
>>GELB: Because
Leonardo is saying
learn this balance
and this harmony
between these modalities.
Learn to trust your intuition
as well as your reason.
Arte/scienza tells us
basically the same message
in a slightly different way.
>>LISA: And then,
they've got the corpor--
>>GELB: Corporalita.
So we have the juggling balls,
because, as we discovered,
Leonardo's a
juggler and so am I.
>>LISA: Ah, we're going to take
a look at that in a second.
>>GELB: And then connessione,
you see the infinity symbol.
It represents the
infinite possibility
to make new connections,
the infinite creativity that
is our birthright.
And you have a
lot of information
right there in a
very small space.
And I asked-- so then I
asked the group, I say,
so if you-- I asked
them to copy this down.
I say, I know you have a camera.
You can take a picture of it.
I'll leave you my
slides, but you copy it,
because you need to draw this
yourself to activate you brain.
And once they draw
it, I say, now,
could you use this to give a
presentation to your children,
or your spouse,
or your colleagues
who weren't here about
the seven principles?
They say, yeah, I could.
And then I ask them,
I say, could this
have been my notes
for this talk?
And they say, they
probably were.
And I say, could it
have been the notes
from which I wrote the book?
Yes, they were.
Now my original mind map on da
Vinci was not this organized.
And it wasn't in
clockwise rotation.
Because one of the
messages I introduce
in "How to Think Like
Leonardo," and then
I go into much more depth
in "Creativity On Demand"
is one of the great
secrets of creativity
is-- the biggest block to it
is people-- my clients suffer
from what I call
"premature organization."
>>LISA: OK.
>>GELB: They try to put things
in outline and order-- number
one, number two, number three--
before they've generated it.
So I promise to cure
them and I promise
to cure everybody who's with us.
>>LISA: OK.
That's good.
>>GELB: And here's the cure.
It's really simple.
Generate first, then organize.
>>LISA: So generate
the big picture first.
>>GELB: Generate
first, then organize.
Right.
Let your mind go free.
Think of as many things
as you possibly can.
Then do exactly what I
shared with you that I did.
Then step back, ask
what's most important.
Ask what order it should go in.
And then rinse and repeat as
necessary until problem solved.
>>LISA: Create and repeat.
>>GELB: Right.
>>LISA: Very good.
We're going to take a look
here at Michael talking
to a group of-- this is
chiropractors, right?
>>GELB: I think so.
Yeah, a wonderful group
called the Master's Circle.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
Take a look at Michael
Gelb on creativity.
>>GELB: I went to the place
where Leonardo was born.
And I went to the
place where he died.
And I literally
walked his footsteps
and aimed to look at the
world from his point of view.
I read his notebooks
over and over again.
I read the scholarly
works about him.
I started dreaming about
him, and from those dreams,
seven principles emerged.
I learned how to juggle.
Many years ago, I
saw someone doing it
and I thought it was
incredibly beautiful.
Looked to me like
moving sculpture.
So I went up to
this great juggler
and I asked him to teach me.
But it turned out
he was not as good
a teacher as he was a juggler.
Because you know
what he told me?
He said, take these three
balls, throw them up,
don't let any of them drop.
You ever get an
instruction like that
in the course of your career?
Well, I tried really
hard and the balls
were dropping over
and over again.
I would have given up, but
I really wanted to learn.
And then I had an
enlightenment experience.
I realized that if I could
discover curiosita, be
more like a child, more
playful, it'd be much easier.
Dimonstrazione was clear.
I had to figure
it out for myself.
Sensazione.
I started to feel the
rhythm, enjoy the color.
Sfumato.
I realized that
learning anything
was a journey into the unknown.
Arte/scienza and corporalita
were all about balance.
And that's when I had the
enlightenment-- connessione.
Everything connects
to everything else.
If you meditate on this
pattern, what is it?
Infinity.
It represents your
infinite potential.
The art critic Bernard Berenson
said of Leonardo da Vinci
that everything he touched
turned to eternal beauty.
My wish for you is you'll
take these principles
and bring a touch of that beauty
to your life every single day.
Grazie mille.
God bless you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Grazie mille.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
>>EMCEE: Michael Gelb.
Micheal Gelb.
>>LISA: OK, so I see
that you're a juggler.
When did you teach
yourself to juggle?
And why?
Why?
>>GELB: Well, I saw someone
do it when I was 21.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GELB: And I was
actually struggling
to find what was my form
of artistic expression.
Because I wasn't-- I
tried music lessons and I
wasn't particularly gifted.
I'd taken art lessons.
I learned laboriously.
I actually collected mud
from the bottom of a river
and learned how to throw
it into a pot, which
was quite beautiful in
the end, but it took me
a really long time.
So I just, you know.
And other people were going--
swoosh-- and there it was.
So I was struggling for what is
my form of artistic expression.
When I saw somebody juggle,
I said, that-- that's it.
I got to do that.
>>LISA: That's a good example.
Because I could see someone
juggle and say that-- and not
say that that's mine.
So it matters what
you resonate with.
>>GELB: Anyway, I saw that and
I said, I got to learn that.
So I went to this great juggler
and I ask him to teach me.
But it turns out
he was not as good
a teacher as he was a juggler.
Because you know
what he told me?
He said, take these three
balls, throw them up,
don't let any of them drop.
>>LISA: Well, obviously.
>>GELB: I always ask
my clients, do you ever
get instructions like that?
And they say, every day.
And of course, I tried and
the balls fell everywhere.
And I was failing.
I would have given up.
But then, there's a great
question whenever you're really
struggling, you say,
is there a better way?
Is there something I
haven't thought of.
And I had this "aha" insight.
I realized that instead of
trying to catch the balls,
what if I focused on the throw?
>>LISA: OK.
OK.
>>GELB: And even
more fundamentally,
what if I focused on my
own internal alignment
and did not allow my
attempt to "get it right"
interfere with my own
poise and balance?
It helped that I was studying
the Alexander Technique
at this time.
>>LISA: So you knew
about being focused.
>>GELB: I did.
>>LISA: And you
knew about aligning.
OK.
>>GELB: I said, yes, so
let's focus on alignment
and focus first, then
let's take the task
and break it down into
simplest elements.
So I started just tossing
one ball back and forth.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GELB: Then two.
And I figured out,
if I didn't even
try to catch them--
I let them drop--
I could get the
throw more perfect.
Then I threw three
and let them drop.
And then, before
you knew it, they
were just landing in my hands.
And this great
thing happened where
they seem to be almost
going around by themselves.
And then I realized that, wow,
this is the infinity symbol.
>>LISA: True.
>>GELB: How cool is that?
Represents our infinite
potential to learn and create.
>>LISA: Start off
again when you said
you just threw one
back and forth.
>>GELB: Sure.
So here.
I could put those there.
So actually, here's the
thing-- let me do three
and we'll do a little exercise.
Look at the yellow ball.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GELB: You're watching
the yellow ball?
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>GELB: What is it doing?
Keep your eye on the
yellow ball at all times.
>>LISA: It's going
from hand to hand.
Aha.
>>GELB: All it's doing is this.
>>LISA: Right.
>>GELB: And that doesn't
look so hard, doest it?
>>LISA: No.
>>GELB: So if I now ask
you look at the pink ball,
you see that's all it's doing.
>>LISA: Doing the same thing.
>>GELB: Now look
at the purple one.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GELB: That's all it's doing.
>>GELB: So the fundamental--
one of the great principles
of solving any problem
is take the task,
break it down into
its simplest elements.
So the simplest element is this.
And almost everybody is
very comfortable doing this.
So that's how I taught this
to 1,000 IBM engineers,
for example.
>>LISA: I can do that.
>>GELB: Yes.
So we toss one ball
back and forth.
And then as you do it, pay
attention to the breathing
easily.
>>LISA: You're not looking
at the ball, are you?
>>GELB: Well, your
eyes stay soft.
Because when you
have three balls,
you can't keep your eye
on the ball, can you?
>>LISA: OK.
That's true.
>>GELB: So your eyes look in
the center and they stay soft.
When you soften your
eyes, your whole body
tends to relax and be in
a more balanced state.
Helps to have a little smile
on your face as you do it.
You're doing great.
OK, so then, our next step
would be to throw one, two,
and let them drop.
Don't even try to catch them.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
>>GELB: And what I do when I
do this with the executives
is we pair up and your partner
picks the balls up for you.
So you don't have
to worry at all
about making what we used
to think of as a mistake.
You get to focus
purely on the throw.
Then we say, OK, throw
two and just catch one.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GELB: Then throw two, see
if you can catch them both.
If you drop, don't worry because
your partner picks it up.
Then you're going to throw
three, let them drop.
I don't want to mess
up the whole studio,
so I'll just hold on to them.
And then throw three, catch
one, three, catch two, three,
catch three.
And then people-- I
love this, because these
are people under a lot of
stress, a lot of pressure,
serious jobs, big companies.
Besides which, they're
instantly having fun.
What really happens?
When they get this
for the first time.
>>LISA: I did it!
>>GELB: We call it
their first juggulation.
And I'm telling you,
executive vice presidents,
heads of divisions,
they're screaming in joy.
>>LISA: Oh, my gosh.
Great.
>>GELB: They're
screaming in ecstasy.
>>LISA: As they should be.
>>GELB: Ah!
And it's one of my
favorite sounds.
And then, of course, if you
want to keep the process going,
you have to keep
tossing the ball, which
means it'll probably drop again.
So it's one of the
lessons is, if you want
to keep learning
at a higher level,
you have to keep letting go
and being willing to embrace
the chaos that
comes with-- think
about what happens when
we try four balls or five?
>>LISA: Oh, no.
>>GELB: Well, it's
the same principles.
>>LISA: Really?
>>GELB: So when I
teach public speaking,
I teach presentation skills
and executive presence.
Maybe you're comfortable
speaking to a small team of 20.
How about your first
speech for 200 people?
How about the first
time you do 2000 people.
And how about when you're
on live television in front
of millions of people?
So, you have to access--
These principles just
become more import-- the
fundamental principles become
that much more important as
the challenge grows greater.
>>LISA: I'm sure
you can teach people
when someone drops the ball,
you got to pick it up for them
and run.
>>GELB: That's fine.
>>LISA: Pick it up for
them and do the dance.
Yeah, there's a lot of
teaching within that.
>>GELB: It's a great
team-building exercise.
You learn to support
your partner.
And what's great is,
I get people then
to give each other feedback
on what's going on.
And even people who don't
yet know how to juggle
can help others juggle, mostly
just by their supportive
attention.
When you give
supportive attention,
you help create a field
that makes learning easier
and makes creativity easier.
>>LISA: Do you mean
by actively listening?
>>GELB: By actively listening.
>>LISA: And being
present for the person.
>>GELB: By
empathically listening.
>>LISA: All right.
So there's mastering-- there's
five mastering principles
that you talk about in
"Creativity On Demand."
And if we could break
those down a little bit
to help someone-- anyone who's
going to a creative process,
are these the five steps
that they would start with?
>>GELB: This contextualizes
the whole creative process.
This is in part three of
"Creativity On Demand" called
Mastering the Creative Process.
The book has three parts.
There's Mastering
Creative Energy,
which is the first part.
There's Mastering
the Creative Mindset,
which is the second part.
And then there's Mastering
the Creative Process.
So what we're learning to
do is put them all together.
>>LISA: Energy,
mindset, process.
>>GELB: Yeah.
So this is the third one,
Mastering the Creative Process.
And to master the
creative process,
you need to know
these five phases.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GELB: The Preparation phase.
I might joke about this is when
I was growing up in New Jersey,
would-be hoodlums in my
class would come up to me
and say, you got a problem?
And I think that's why
I just got interested
in creative problem solving.
What's your problem?
You got a problem?
>>LISA: Nope.
>>GELB: You, may I
help you with it?
With the first
phase, preparation,
where you define the problem.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GELB: A problem well
formulated is half solved.
>>LISA: I love that phrase.
Yes.
>>GELB: When you clarify
what the issue is--
and what's the underlying issue?
Can you imagine how
much happier people
would be in their relationship
is when they had a fight
or difficulty with
their partner,
if they went right
to asking themselves,
OK, what are we real--
what's really going on here?
Usually, it takes you six
months, or sometimes years
to find out.
Or you don't figure it out
until after you got the divorce.
>>LISA: Or that's what
tax preparation is,
is finding out where the money
was gathered and so forth.
It's preparing.
>>GELB: Preparing.
Laying out-- Well, that's
a complimentary skill,
which is asking,
just what's the data?
What's the information?
So that's what you do in
the preparation phase.
You ask, what's the data
and the information?
Is this the real problem?
Has anybody solved this before?
Are there underlying issues
we haven't considered?
And do we have any prejudices or
preconceptions that prevent us
from seeing this in an
open and intelligent way?
>>LISA: That's a good point.
So it would easily be
judgment upon yourself,
or I can't do
this, or I've never
done this before type of thing.
>>GELB: And then
what's great about this
is unprecedented in
the new book is then
we give you a chi practice--
a Qigong practice-- to access
the energy of the
preparation state.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GELB: Yeah.
>>LISA: Wonderful.
>>GELB: So there's
one for each of these.
That's what's different
about this book.
It's not just
these phases, which
I've shared and taught before.
It's, OK, here's the Qigong
practice that supports this.
>>LISA: What is the
practice for this one?
>>GELB: There are a range of
different ones you could do.
>>LISA: Just an example.
>>GELB: One great one--
it's not in the book,
but it's one I since have
learned from a master
at a retreat I recently took.
Is you stand in a
balanced stance.
One foot forward,
the other food back.
And then you shift to
the opposite stance,
so you're harmonizing and
balancing your energy.
>>LISA: As preparation.
>>GELB: Tuning up the antenna
and strengthening your energy.
It's one of the
simple-- Then you
can stand in the very basic
stance in between those two.
And so any one of those
is incredibly potent.
>>LISA: For preparation.
>>GELB: For preparation
and strengthening
your sense of core energy.
>>LISA: I like that you
added the physical into this.
>>GELB: That's what's
really fun about this.
>>LISA: It's not
just the neck up.
>>GELB: So then the generation
phase, that's the next phase.
That's where we say,
OK, if we didn't
get immediate insight that
solves it for us, once we
laid it out and went
through that whole process,
now we need to generate
lots of new ideas.
But-- that's what people
usually call brainstorming.
>>LISA: Or mind mapping.
>>GELB: So then you
can use my mapping
to generate those ideas.
There's lots of
other techniques,
but that's the most
effective one I've found.
>>LISA: OK.
>>GELB: So you
generate lots of ideas.
And then I have a
couple really cool
chi practices for
generating new ideas.
>>LISA: Can we do one of them?
>>GELB: Well, one
of the simplest ones
was contributed by my dear
friend Wendy Palmer, who's
a six dan Aikido sensei,
musician, leadership
consultant.
>>LISA: Creative.
>>GELB: An amazingly powerful
and inspirational human being.
And her generation
phase exercise--
I asked her, what would you
like to contribute to the book.
And she said, have people do
whatever mindfulness meditation
centering practice
they do, and then
open themselves to
the creative wisdom
of whoever inspires
them the most.
So it might be
Leonardo da Vinci.
It might be Marie Curie.
It could be Queen Elizabeth I.
>>LISA: The collective
consciousness of that.
>>GELB: But choose a
particular representation
that works for you.
And ask that it be
present with you as you--
>>LISA: Pull it down.
>>GELB: Pull it down and
approach this problem.
And it's so simple,
it's so elegant.
>>LISA: It's a great idea.
That's how you
generate new ideas.
>>GELB: That's just one of them.
There's also another great one
from Stephen Russell, Barefoot
Doctor, who's an amazingly
inspirational genius, Qigong
master, musician.
He just had tea at my house.
Actually, he had coffee,
which I made for him.
He's one of the
coolest, coolest guys.
And he created this
amazing practice.
It takes a little too long
to talk about in detail now.
But you're moving the energy
between the front and the back
to open up-- to
open up-- basically,
you're opening up
the crown chakra
to let the wisdom
come powering in.
>>LISA: Those two
work well together.
>>GELB: Those are the two I put
in for the generation phase.
Because they worked well
together, as you immediately,
intuitively recognized.
Then the incubation phase,
where we sleep on it.
>>LISA: Allow the neural
connections to be made.
Yes.
>>GELB: I actually
have an interview
with the former chairman of AOL,
who's one my Tai Chi and Qigong
buddies.
And he uses sitting
and standing meditation
to incubate these huge ideas.
He helped to get Hulu, Kayak,
Tumbler, as well as help
running AOL.
He's a brilliant guy.
His name is John Miller.
And here's a guy at the
highest levels of business,
he's using these practices.
He uses standing meditation
and sitting meditation--
>>LISA: That's interesting.
>>GELB: --when he has a really
serious business challenge,
to help move the
incubation process forward.
>>LISA: And he does
it by stillness.
>>GELB: By stillness.
And he says-- You can read
his own words in the book,
but he says, I hold
the problem before me
without trying to solve it.
And then I sit.
I do the sitting or
standing meditation.
And then solutions
begin to emerge.
And it feels-- You
know, the great thing,
I interviewed a lot of
these people who practice
some sort of form of Qigong,
Tai Chi, or Aikido, or yoga
and asked them how their
practice affected their ability
to create.
And what they all say,
without exception in the book,
is the experience of
getting it is effortless.
You just have to make yourself
susceptible to the grace.
So we're trying to give
you the methods that
make it just easier
to access this.
>>LISA: It just feels like
movement is such a key.
Such a key.
>>GELB: Well, the balance
between stillness and movement.
Then we have the
evaluation phase.
The evaluation
phase, where we look
at the positive side of the
ideas that have been put forth.
We look at the weaknesses of the
And you have to do both.
You know, if you don't play
the devil-- One of my mottos--
it's in the book-- is if you
don't play devil's advocate,
reality will always
do it for you.
>>LISA: It will show up.
>>GELB: And then you have
to actually make a decision.
So then we have you
go into-- there's
ver-- many, many versions.
In Chinese it's called
the wuji stance.
And it's the stance
of pure neutrality.
So you are beyond yin and yang.
And it's here that you
access the energy that
allows you to make a wiser,
more neutral decision.
Now you've made the decision,
but nothing creative
has actually happened yet,
until the fifth phase.
>>LISA: OK.
And that is?
>>LISA: And this is
where a lot of artists
and wonderful healing,
beautiful people
don't integrate their
ahas or insights,
into the implementation phase.
>>LISA: And that's
actually the doing.
>>GELB: This is where you
actually have to get it done.
>>LISA: The action.
>>GELB: You have to access
a different kind of energy
in the implementation phase.
And I use-- You know,
my favorite role
model for implementation?
I love Leonardo.
He's my supreme favorite
genius of all time.
But for implementation,
it's Thomas Edison.
>>LISA: True.
>>GELB: So we created
this great acronym called
SMART Edison, which people can
learn about in the book, that
embodies the principles
that Edison taught.
He created three new industries.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GELB: He
illuminated the world,
he invented the
recording industry,
and he invented the movie
camera and effectively
the technology of
the movie industry.
But his greatest
invention of all
was never patented, even though
he got 1,093 United States
patents which remains
the record by far.
His greatest invention
was the creation
of a systematic
culture of innovation.
So I channel Edison, and we
give you the wisdom of Edison
in the implementation chapter.
We say, OK, you really
want to get it done?
You've got your idea.
It was Nolan Bushnell, the
famous entrepreneur founder
of Atari, said,
anybody who's ever
taken a shower has got an idea.
But the real action
comes-- now I'm
paraphrasing-- is when you dry
off and get out and actually do
it.
>>LISA: And actually do it.
Right.
Absolutely.
>>GELB: And as you
can feel, these modes
are very different energies.
>>LISA: Yes, I can,
actually, yeah.
The implementation, it's
more forward movement.
There's stillness,
there's, yeah, balance.
>>GELB: So it helps to have
energetic practices to summon
those energies.
>>LISA: Well, you've
done an amazing job
for helping us understand the
creative process in a very
clear way.
I love that you've added
the energy component to it,
and it's not just a
neck-up conversation.
>>GELB: No.
>>LISA: You've
implemented all sorts
of senses in the creative
process, which is important.
>>GELB: Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
Great conversation,
great information.
And if you would like to watch
the replay of my interview
with Michael Gelb, you
can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]